# DISC
Deciphering Immune Senescence in Cancer

Immunotherapy has revolutionized cancer treatment over the last decade, underscoring the instrumental role of the immune system in the quest for cancer eradication. Despite the impressive success still a significant proportion of patients do not respond, whereas responses are often accompanied by severe and life-threatening immune-related adverse events. This highlights the existence of unappreciated mechanisms of tumor immune evasion, and their delineation is urgently needed in order to design rationale therapies towards a more effective management of cancer. Recent advances in tumor immunology have provided unequivocal evidence for the exquisite role of T lymphocytes in development of anti-tumor immunity. However, a comprehensive characterization of dysfunctional T cells as well as the elucidation of the precise molecular mechanisms that induce T cell dysfunction in the TME remain elusive. 

Cellular senescence is a stress-response mechanism which protects organismal integrity by holding back potentially harmful cells from expanding (Gorgoulis et al., 2019). Regardless of the insult, cells undergoing senescence share certain common characteristics: (i) they are cell cycle-arrested though metabolically active and viable, and (ii) they display an altered pro-inflammatory secretory pathway, the so-called senescence associated secretory phenotype (SASP) (Gorgoulis et al, 2019). It has been shown that if senescent cells are not eradicated, a pro-tumorigenic effect may take place over time; senescent cells may “escape” and re-enter the cell cycle (Zampetidis et al, 2021; Galanos et al., 2016, 2018; Yu et al., 2018; Milanovic et al., 2018; Patel et al., 2016), thereby generating a niche of aggressive offsprings which will expand, thus promoting tumor growth. 

Senescence has been extensively studied in the non-immune compartment of the human organism however it still remains poorly understood whether senescence operates on immune cells and more specifically on the T cell compartment. In fact, despite the incremental use of the term “immunosenescence” in the literature, the term mostly refers to immune populations undergoing replicative senescence and exhibiting the SASP or is intertwined with inadequate expansion of T-cell receptors (Henson et al, 2015) and compromised immune activation (Henson et al, 2015; Sceneay et al, 2019). Hallmarks of immune senescence therefore remain elusive, and consequently, isolation and functional characterization of truly senescent immune populations with precise tools is of great importance. Considering that our preliminary data demonstrate T cells in the TME to exhibit a dominant senescent profile, herein we propose to elucidate the phenotypic and molecular profile of these cells and to identify their functional importance, with the ultimate goal to reinvigorate the T cell functional activity and to promote tumor eradication.

 Preliminary data describe in silico tracking of senescent-like immune cells in human NSCLC. Briefly in order to identify senescent-like immune cells we first conducted an analysis of four gene sets (associated with Replicative Senescence (RS), Ras-Induced- Senescence (RIS), Oncogene-Induced-Senescence (OIS) and Oxidative Stress (OS) induced Senescence) and  ended up with a senescence gene signature. Details for the various datasets used are provided in the "datasets_used_for_the_senescence_gene_markers_analysis.xlsx". The flowchart of the analysis can be examined with the pdf schematic "pipeline_for_deciphering_overall_senescent_markers.pdf". This is comprised of 14 hallmark senescence-associated markers and the senescence signature was subsequently applied onto a scRNA-seq (Kim et al, 2020) and a TCRseq (Guo et al, 2018) database to track senescent-like immune cell as can be seen from the "senescence_immune_cell-type_analysis.pdf". The T cell populations were found to contain the highest percentage of senescent cells and therefore we focused on them. A UMAP visualising T cell subtypes as distinct populations with colour annotations has been concluded which demonstrates different T cell subclusters presenting significant abundance of senescent cells in NSCLC tumours (compared to respective normal tissue), these are highlighted by dashed lines. Senescent populations within T cell clusters highlighted at the UMAP display normal tissue vs lung tumors (*P<0.05 of Student’s t test). We provide notebooks with the basic analysis followed for the scRNA-seq data.
 
   In order to determine a SASP signature per senescent stimuli an analysis of secretome data has been conducted. The results from the comparisons of senescent versus normal and cancer (lung) versus normal studies have been overlapped with data from senequest while labelling the function of senescent (inhibiting or inducing senescence) from SeneQuest. Gene network topologies have been used in order to decipher key regulatory senescent markers as these marker genes will be master regulators based on the network topology. The topology of a network uses a score based on the interaction between the nodes (strong interactions higher score where the scores are obtained from an in house database wich takes into account information from String db (https://string-db.org/) and experimentally verified interactions from literature and assigns scores for each interaction) and the regulation regarding the secreted senescence phenotype. A gene will be considered as a key molecule if it has many connections with other genes ascosciated with senescense as obtained from SeneQuest platform, which also have a regulatory role in senescence (induce senescence). Furthermore, this gene will be considered as a SASP key molecule if it secreted, up regulated in senescence and is known to interact with cell membrane receptors. Cell membrane receptor interactions have been identified from various sources and programs such as CellTalkDB (http://tcm.zju.edu.cn/celltalkdb/) and cellnet. Some simple jupyter notebook examples conducted in jupyter lab can be seen with the  cell-cell-interactions.ipynb notebook.
